- Are deepfakes rewriting history?
(logo beeping)
(upbeat music)
It's March 2021,
a woman is arrested
after sharing a manipulated video
of her daughter's
cheerleading rival vaping
to get her kicked off the team.
After all, who needs the
threat of physical violence
when it's possible to ruin someone's life
using nothing but social
media photos and a video.
Welcome to "CyberNews.com."
My name is Leah Bolton.
Join me today as we
explore what a deepfake is
and how deepfakes can completely distort
the reality we live in.
Make sure to like and subscribe
if you like explainer
videos like this one,
and don't forget to turn on notifications
so you don't miss our weekly updates
on everything related to
technology and cyber security.
Let's dive into this deepfake explainer.
So what exactly is a deepfake?
Simply put, deepfakes are videos
in which one person's face
has been replaced by a
computer-generated face
that closely looks like another person.
The term was born in Reddit
when members of a group called Deepfake
used AI to put celebrities
faces on porn actors.
Take a look at this Tom Cruise video.
- What's up, TikTok?
You guys cool if I play some sports?
- Looks close to reality
yet it is a deepfake.
The programs that create deepfakes
usually use two different
AIs at the same time.
The first one will scan images, videos,
and audio of the victim
and then generate a
tampered image or video.
- I'm gonna show you some magic.
- The second AI will
compare them to real images
and report any difference.
Finally, the first AI
will receive this feedback
and repeat the process several times
until the second one can't tell a fake
from the real thing anymore.
This technology has evolved
to the point that it is
accessible to nearly everyone
and it is likely to get easier
as computing power improves,
but the power of deepfakes
is even more sinister
than might originally seen.
Channel 4 in England
made a statement with the video
known as Queen Elizabeth's
"Alternative Christmas Speech"
in 2020.
The video began
with the Queen addressing
the British people
as she does every year
but then things got twisted
when she began to make jokes
about public crown
scandals from that year.
Only when she stood up to dance,
people started to realize
it wasn't really her.
♪ Don't need your love ♪
♪ I'm a sinner ♪
♪ There's my lover crying ♪
The video raised awareness,
as well as some eyebrows
and opened up the conversation
about the seriousness and
even maybe the dangers
of deepfake technology.
And that's just the beginning.
Deepfakes can be used in warfare
to raise or kill military morale.
In March 2022,
Meta removed a video posted on Facebook
of President Zelensky
encouraging Ukrainian people-
(President Zelensky speaking
in foreign language)
To lay down their arms,
after realizing it was a deepfake.
The video went viral on the platform
and was shown in TV 24's hacked
website as breaking news.
The Ukrainian president
had to debunk the scam
posting a video of himself
on his own Telegram channel
supporting Ukrainian troops.
Not everything is merely
misinformation though,
deepfakes can be used to
target pretty much everyone,
from celebrities and political figures,
to regular citizens.
It was only two years ago that Sensity,
an intelligence company
specialized in visual threats,
recorded 85,000 deepfake videos.
These meant to destroy reputations.
These videos consisted
of creating non-consensual pornography
or even inciting fear and violence
through incendiary speeches
from targeted politicians.
These incidents are getting worse
and involve digital abuse,
such as harassment,
blackmail, and public shaming.
Of course, the ability of
putting someone's face or voice
into another person
presents a huge opportunity
to a bunch of unscrupulous people.
In 2019, "The Wall
Street Journal" reported
that this CEO of a UK-based company
believed he was on the phone with his boss
when he instantly
transferred 220,000 euros
following his orders
only to find out
he was actually speaking to scammers
who imitated his employer's voice
using AI technology.
Many experts state that deepfakes
are the biggest cybersecurity
threat nowadays,
and they're kind of right.
Recent tech developments
have advanced towards
biometrical technologies,
from cell phone locks,
to bank accounts and passports.
These types of security
that rely heavily on face recognition
seem to be at risk with deepfakes evolving
at such a fast pace.
Big tech companies are aware
of this harmful potential
and are coming up with powerful tools,
including cutting edge technology,
to detect this kind of video.
Wondering how to recognize
a deepfake video?
Some experts say
it's the blinking that gives fakes away.
It's hard for an AI
to closely recreate human behavior.
As a result,
deepfakes blink much less
frequently than humans.
Maybe one of the most talked
about dangers of deepfake
is related to politics.
In the 2020 US presidential elections,
many feared that deepfakes
could influence the voting results.
Fortunately, these fears
didn't materialize,
with the only deepfakes
related to the elections
being satirical.
However, the US government
established a deepfake task force
which aims to safeguard the
population from scammers
who want to defraud America
using artificial intelligence.
There are already fears
that if people don't get better
at differentiating fakes
from authentic videos,
it could cost them prison sentences,
fake accusations,
or even false fakes.
Just to give you an example,
three years ago in Malaysia,
a politician was caught on several videos
proving his sexual misconduct
to which he sustained were manipulated
when they actually weren't.
Oh, and by the way,
do you remember that case I mentioned
at the beginning of this video,
the one about the cheerleader's mom?
Well, they couldn't prove
the video was manipulated
and even many experts
concluded it might be real.
The woman's most high
profile charges were dropped
not without first making it
to international headlines
and seriously damaging her reputation.
Not everything is grim though,
there have been positive
uses of deepfake technology.
For example,
it is being used in training
videos for companies,
and there are TV shows
like "Sassy Justice"
that create characters faces using AI.
There're even cases
like the "Welcome to Chechnya" documentary
in which the creators
use deepfake technology
to protect the identity
of the LGBTQ+ community
they were portraying in Southern Russia.
So, is it a good or a bad technology?
Before jumping to my final conclusions,
remember to like this video,
if you haven't already,
and to subscribe for more content
on technology and cyber security.
The technology behind
deepfakes is very new
and maybe we shouldn't judge it just yet.
Like any technology,
it can bring positive innovations
regardless of the fact that
there is a dark side to it.
One thing I'm certainly worried about
is something called the Liar's Dividend.
According to the concept,
deepfakes might allow
criminals to walk free.
This is already happening
and it's hindering legal
processes along the way.
Experts suggest, in the coming years,
we should expect more and
more of this to happen.
What are your actual
thoughts on deepfakes?
What's the craziest deepfake video
that you've ever watched,
and what do you think this technology
will bring to the future?
Let me know in the comments down below.
I'd love to read your
takes on this technology.
Thank you so much for joining me
on this deepfakes explainer video.
I will see you in the next one.
(light upbeat music)